>It began with two women
>nine young men, and a charge of rape...
>MAN:Who said what, when?
>Rising to envelop a Jewish lawyer from New York
>the justice system in Alabama, the American Communist Party
>the United States Supreme Court
>the attention of the nation.
>It began with two women and nine young men.
>What really happened?
>"Scottsboro: An American Tragedy"
>tonight on American Experience.
>( train clacking along tracks )
>MAN:Hear the rattle of gravel
>as it rides whistlingthrough the day and night.
>Not the old or the young on it
>nor people with any differencein their color or shape
>not girls or men,Negroes or white
>but people with this in common:
>people that no one had use for,had nothing to give to
>no place to offerbut the cars of a freight train
>careening through Paint Rock,through Memphis
>through town after townwithout halting.
>MAN 2:I've had people that knew
>that you and I were goingto have this conversation
>and some of them said,"Oh, don't do it.
>Don't stir it up again."
>I said,"Well, it's a part of us."
>MAN 3:It begins witha fairly clear-cut issue
>of black and white,of sexuality, of rape.
>Then it becomesincreasingly confused.
>MAN 4:The image of black menwas that they were
>anxious at all timesto rape a white woman.
>And it was the Scottsboro casethat met that issue head on.
>MAN 5:"Will you let them murder thenine Negro boys in Scottsboro?
>"No!
>"Louder: No!
>"Organize, demonstrate, protest.
>Raise your voices."
>MAN 6:What Scottsboro teaches us
>is that you cannot underestimatethe power of our history
>as it relates to race,as it relates to poverty
>as it relates to sectionalism,in the struggle for justice.
>MAN 3:There are heroes in the story
>but that's the footnoteto the story.
>The tragedy of thisare nine boys' lives
>hopelessly,eternally interrupted
>sent cascading down roadsof terror and imprisonment.
>No, I don't think there'sany way to see this story
>but as a great tragedy.
>( train whistle blowing )
>NARRATOR:On the morning of March 25, 1931
>a freight of theSouthern Rail Corporation
>left Chattanooga, Tennessee,bound for points west.
>( crossing bell clanging )
>Scattered among the carsof the freight
>were some two dozen hoboes,black and white.
>A few minutesout of Lookout Mountain
>the train dipped into thenortheastern corner of Alabama.
>MAN:As the train emerged from thetunnel under Lookout Mountain
>a group of whites was movingalong the top of the train
>and they stepped on the handof one of the blacks
>and almost knocked himoff the train.
>NARRATOR:The hand belonged to an 18-year-old named Haywood Patterson
>who was on his way to Memphisto look for work.
>READER:"We was just minding our ownbusiness, when one of them said
>"'This is a white man's train--all you nigger bastards unload.
>"But we weren't going nowhere,so there was a fight.
>We got the best of itand threw them off."
>Haywood Patterson.
>NARRATOR:Word of the fight reached thetiny town of Paint Rock, Alabama
>where the train was scheduledto stop and take on water.
>MAN:In Paint Rock,news goes out that there is
>a gang of blacks,a gang of Negroes on the train
>that beat up a gang of whites.
>A posse is organized.
>virtually every man in PaintRock with a gun or a rope
>shows up.
>The train stops, the possegoes up and down the train
>looking in all the cars.
>MAN:What they thoughtthey were going to find
>is a group of blacks who hadbeaten up a group of whites
>and thrown them off the train.
>Immediately unexpected thingsbegan to happen.
>That's what you most fearin a racial confrontation
>is the unexpected.
>NARRATOR:Suddenly, fromthe shadows of a boxcar
>emerged two white women,pale and disheveled.
>At first they weren't evenaware that they were women.
>They were wearing overalls.
>They identified themselves asVictoria Price and Ruby Bates.
>And there areconflicting accounts
>about who said what, when
>but one of the young women said,"We've been raped.
>All these colored boysraped us."
>And... that was it.
tts:textAlign="left">A bunch of people heregot the guys off the train
tts:textAlign="left">marched themup here...
tts:textAlign="left">about wherethis old building--
>right across from where thewhite wrecked car is there--
>lined them upagainst the wall there.
>I saw a lot of peoplesurrounding those boys
>many of them havingguns, of course
>and ropes or pieces of rope.
>They were intent on mayhem.
>MAN:For any black man in Alabama
>whenever you saw a groupof white men with guns
>in the menacing, ominous way
>in which people were collectedin Paint Rock, Alabama
>you knew you werein a lot of trouble.
>NARRATOR:There werenine prisoners in all.
>One of them was19-year-old Clarence Norris.
>NORRIS:The place wassurrounded with a mob.
>They had shotguns,pistols, sticks
>pieces of iron, everything.
>The crowd commenced to hollering
>"Let's take theseblack son-of-a-bitches up here
>and put them to a tree."
>I just thoughtthat I was going to die.
>MAN:Mr. Broadway
>sent up to the storeand got a skein--
>I never heard that word before,a "skein" of plowline--
>and the rope was cut into piecesthat where they could tie
>the hands of the onesthat was under arrest.
>And then the next thing was
>"How we going to get themto Scottsboro?"
>NARRATOR:The prisoners were loadedonto a truck
>and driven tothe nearby town of Scottsboro.
>On March 25, 1931, a friendand I were playing basketball
>at the sideof the Jackson County jail.
>And we noticeda flatbed stake-body truck
>stop in front of the jail
>with a guard with rifleson each corner.
>They quickly unloadedthe prisoners.
>Crowds were beginning to formoutside the jail.
>The rumor was that they weregoing to go into the jail.
>There was already poles outside
>that they were going to breakthe door down with.
>NORRIS:Cars, trucks, they was coming in
>all kinds of ways, the mob was:
>"Bring them niggersout of there.
>"If you don't bring themout of there, goddamn it
>we'll come in and get them."
>That's all you could hear
>all you could hearall over that little town.
>The sheriff goes outon the front porch
>and basically makes the commentto the growing crowd outside
>that the first individual
>that puts their footon their doorstep--
>he's going to kill them.
>WANN:As the situationbecame desperate
>my father took his pistol offand gave it to his deputies.
>He walked out the front door
>right throughthe middle of the mob
>and they separated for him;not a hand touched him.
>He went to the courthouseand called the governor.
>NARRATOR:By the next morning
>the National Guardhad secured the jail
>while newspapers identifiedwhat one called
>"the nine Negro brutes."
>Of the nine, only four had knowneach other before their arrest.
>Charlie Weems,the oldest, was 19;
>Eugene Williams,the youngest, 13.
>Willie Roberson sufferedfrom syphilis so severe
>he could barely walk.
>Olin Montgomery, nearly blind,had been looking for a job
>to pay for a pair of glasses.
>Clarence Norris had left behindten siblings in rural Georgia.
>Ozie Powell had been foundriding alone.
>Andy Wright, 19, and his13-year-old brother Roy
>had riddenfrom Chattanooga together.
>It was Roy's first timeaway from home.
>Haywood Patterson had beenriding the freight trains
>so long, he said he couldlight a butt in the wind
>from the top of a moving car.
>By the time the nine defendantshad taken to the rails
>the full brunt of the Depressionhad already struck the South
>and no state was hurtingworse than Alabama.
>FLYNT:Alabama in the 1930s wasliterally a world coming apart
>with massive unemployment in astate that had always been poor
>with increasing conflictbetween both classes and races.
>It was a state that wasin calamitous conditions.
>Families were disintegrating.
>Hoboes were frequentingthe railroads
>by the thousandsand tens of thousands.
>NARRATOR:The two accusers alsohad been driven onto the rails
>by economic necessity.
>Ruby Bates, 17, andVictoria Price, 21, hailed
>from the cotton centerof Huntsville
>40 miles from Scottsboro.
>They worked together
>in the poorestof the town's textile mills.
>At 21, Price wasalready twice married
>and had served timein the workhouse
>for adultery and vagrancy.
>CARTER:Victoria Price...
>was tough--a survivor in every way.
>She hardly fit the stereotypeof the young Southern lady--
>hard-talking, tobacco-chewing...but a kind of feistiness to her.
>Ruby Bates istotally different--
>very quiet, soft-spoken.
>In effect it wasa kind of relationship
>in which Victoriatotally dominated Ruby Bates.
>( steam whistle blowing )
>NARRATOR:The mills in whichthe girls worked
>employed mostly young women.
>They labored up to 14 hoursa day in deafening noise
>air choked with cotton lint,and near complete darkness.
>By 1931, wages in the millshad dropped so low
>that Victoria and Rubycould only afford to live
>in the black sectionof Huntsville
>where they occasionallytraded sex
>with both black and white menfor food and clothing.
>GOODMAN:Their lives are, in fact,a complete violation
>of the ideals of segregation.
>But the second that they accusea black man of rape
>at least for an instant,they become pure white women.
>NARRATOR:The trials of the ninedefendants for rape
>got under way on Monday, April6, in the Scottsboro courthouse.
>It was a traditionaltrading day in town
>but the usual crowdwas swelled by thousands more
>from hundreds of miles around.
>Eventually, the largest crowdin Scottsboro's history
>squeezed intothe courthouse square
>as a brass band played "Dixie"
>and "Hail, Hail,the Gang's All Here."
>GRIGG:I saw many strangers,lots of strangers.
>There'd be a carloadover here talking
>and a carloadover there talking--
>some of them from Tennessee.
>I saw Tennessee tagsand Georgia tags.
>And some of them were armed,most of them had shotguns.
>NARRATOR:200 National Guardsmenringed the courthouse
>to keep the crowdfrom rushing its doors.
>MAN:They had strings up
>so the mob could not get upbeyond the string.
>So wheneverthe guard would pass
>the crowd would pushbeyond the sting
>and the guard would turn onhis heel and throw his gun down
>and say, "Get back!"
>But as soon as he would turnhis back, they were back again.
>NARRATOR:The crowds outsidethe courthouse were drawn
>by what one newspaper called
>the "most unspeakable crimein the history of Alabama."
>Since the daysof slavery and before
>what was presumed to be
>the black man's insatiablesexual appetite for white women
>had struck fear in the heartsof Southern whites.
>The protectionof white womanhood--
>it might be the pivotaround all of Southern culture.
>The 5,000 people who werelynched from 1880 to 1940--
>most of those were casesof black men
>accused of raping or sexuallyassaulting a white woman.
>NARRATOR:In the early 1930s
>the incidents of lynchingsin the South had spiked upward
>tracking the economic miseryof poor whites.
>But so, too, had the efforts
>of a small but powerful factionopposed to lynching.
>With the Scottsboro trials
>the antilynching forces hopedto prove that in Alabama
>the rule of law would prevailagainst the passions of the mob.
>THORNTON:Here was an exampleof their doing it right--
>of showing to the world
>that they were capableof giving equal and fair justice
>to prisonersin the most emotional
>and threatening kindsof conditions.
>NARRATOR:As the trial began
>Victoria Price took the standand told a chilling story.
>PRICE ( dramatized ):There were six to meand three to her.
>One was holding my legs and theother had a knife to my throat
>while another ravished me.
>That one sitting behindthe defendants' counsel
>took my overalls off.
>Six of them hadintercourse with me.
>"Pour it to her, pour itto her," they hollered.
>NARRATOR:Ruby Bates corroborated herfriend's story in every detail
>though she could not identifyany of her attackers.
>Unable to get a lawyerin Scottsboro
>the nine accused rapistswere being represented
>by a Chattanoogareal estate attorney
>hired with $60 scraped togetherby their parents.
>The defendants hadjust one 20-minute meeting
>with their lawyer, during whichhe urged them to plead guilty.
>Now the boys werethe only witnesses called
>to testify in their own defense.
>Clarence Norris and HaywoodPatterson were the first two
>to take the stand.
>FLYNT:The first thing they try to do
>is concoct an excusefor themselves.
>Norris says,"Well, the other eight did it
>but I didn't do it."
>And Patterson says, "Well,I didn't do it, but they did it.
>And it's the classic reactionof people trapped
>in a world where they knowthey're not going to be believed
>where they have no resources
>and so that's the waythey explode.
>NORRIS:The courthouse werefull of people
>and they were jumping abouttheir seats with pistols.
>Nothing... wasn't a black personaround nowhere--
>everybody was whitebut just us nine.
>CARTER:When they announced the verdictof guilty, people ran out
>and the judge was tryingto bring order.
>And as soonas the word got outside
>the crowd outside went crazy.
>NARRATOR:The trials lasted three days.
>All nine Scottsboro defendantswere convicted of rape.
>The jury could not decide
>whether to sentence13-year-old Roy Wright
>to life in prison or death.
>All the others were sentencedto die
>in the Alabama electric chair.
>The Scottsboro defendants,now convicted rapists
>were taken to Kilby Prisonnear Montgomery--
>the pride of the Alabama system.
>Two to a cell, the boys lookedout on 50-foot walls
>topped by gun turretson each corner.
>Their first night in Kilby
>the boys rioted,tearing up their bedding
>and hurling their foodthrough the bars.
>Guards rushed their cellsand beat them.
>READER:"The cell door banged open.
>"They beat on uswith their fists;
>"they kicked and trampedon our legs.
>"The sheriff said to me,'See that gallows, nigger?
>"'If you don't quieten down
>I'll take you around to thatgallows and hang you myself.'"
>Haywood Patterson.
>Understandably,they're terrified.
>They're in oneof the most brutal prisons
>in the United States
>they have a death sentencehanging over them
>and they'relike drowning individuals
>grasping for a life raft
>grasping for a life preserver,grasping for straws.
>( band playing the "Internationale" )
>NARRATOR:When help did come, it was fromthe most unlikely of sources
>the Communist Partyof the United States.
>By 1931, the communists werea small but dynamic force.
>Opportunistic and organized,they seized on the Depression
>as proof of the inevitabledecline of capitalism
>and the riseof a workers' paradise.
>THORNTON:The advent of the Depressionhad made it possible
>for the communiststo gain a hearing
>among people whojust a few years before
>would have dismissedtheir claims.
>It did appear to a greatmany people in the 1930s
>that capitalism was in crisis.
>NARRATOR:For years, the Communist Partyhad devoted special attention
>to the American South
>and to Southern blacksin particular.
>It is only the Communist Partywhich day in and day out
>fights for every demand and needof the Negroes
>in the terror-and lynch-ridden South.
>MAN:The view was that in the South
>we hadan uncompleted revolution.
>Abolition of slavery hadnot been really fulfilled;
>we now had sharecropping.
>We had literallytens of thousands of people
>who were bound to the farmin debt: work all year;
>the end of the year,they would have nothing left.
>We felt that the systemwas maintained
>only in one way-- by terror:
>If you get out of line,you're lynched.
>NARRATOR:But the communistshad found Southern blacks
>deeply rooted in the system.
>Organizers believedthey needed a striking example
>of what they called"Southern lynch justice"
>to rouse blacks to action.
>The mass arrests in Scottsboro
>were justwhat they were waiting for.
>GOODMAN:Two local communist organizersare actually in the courtroom
>during the trials.
>They immediatelysend word of this
>up to party headquartersin New York
>saying, "This isa wonderful opportunity
>"to publicize all the thingswe're trying to publicize
>in the South."
>The national party agrees.
>NARRATOR:Only three weeks afterthe Scottsboro trials
>the communists launchedtheir first demonstration
>on behalf ofthe Scottsboro defendants.
>READER:"200 communists undertookto march down Lenox Avenue
>"through the center of Harlemyesterday afternoon
>in defiance of the police."
>"15 minutes later
>"when 20 policemen had replacedtheir nightsticks
>"and the screams of the womenin the crowd had died down
>the sidewalk was strewnwith communist banners."
>The New York Times.
>NARRATOR:But there wereother organizations--
>principally the venerableNAACP-- eager to defend
>the Scottsboro boys
>for whom the Communist Party'spublic demonstrations
>seemed self-serving,even dangerous.
>CARTER:The NAACP's position is "Thesepeople are revolutionaries.
>"We can talk all we want toabout the ultimate revolution;
>"we've got to defendthese young men in Alabama.
>"And the last thingyou want to do
>"is enrage and inflamelocal juries
>"by raising the specterof communism
>and the class struggleand social equality."
>We were propagandizing,there's just no doubt.
>We were using... yes, we wereusing the Scottsboro case
>to expose what was going onin the South.
>NARRATOR:In June, lawyers from theInternational Labor Defense--
>the legal armof the Communist Party--
>visited the boys in Kilby,trying to raise their spirits
>and secure controlof their defense.
>The ILD lawyersdressed as farmers
>to elude the suspicionsof Kilby's wardens.
>WOMAN:They put on overalls
>and straw hatsand put a straw in their mouth
>and went down to Alabamato see the Scottsboro boys.
>SCHWARTZBART:They had been in very badpsychological condition.
>We brought themcigarettes, chocolate.
>And they were scared
>but they were they weredelighted to see us.
>NARRATOR:But the boys remaineddeeply confused
>by the appearanceof white men from the North
>bearing promises of liberation.
>It was not untila young organizer
>visited the parentsof Haywood Patterson
>and the mother of Ozie Powell
>that the communists finallysecured control of the defense.
>WOMAN:I told them if the InternationalLabor Defense comes
>we don't believein just having a trial.
>We believe in masses of people
>being behind the causethat you're fighting for
>and that's how the InternationalLabor Defense Works.
>CROWD:♪ Workers, farmers,Negro and white ♪
>♪ The lynching forceswe must fight... ♪
>NARRATOR:With control of the case,the communists set about
>to bring Scottsboro to theattention of the entire world.
>CROWD:♪ The Scottsboro boysshall not die ♪
>♪ The Scottsboro boysshall not die ♪
>♪ Workers and the ILD will setthem free, set them free! ♪
>GOODMAN:There was demonstrationsin Germany.
>There was demonstrationsin Spain and in Moscow.
>The world knew about this case
>because of the way thecommunists spread the word.
>MAN:"Attention, attention, comrades.
>"Will you let them murder thenine Negro boys in Scottsboro?
>"No!
>"Louder: No!
>"Organize, demonstrate, protest.
>Raise your voices,raise your fists and scream.
>Stop! Stop! Stop!"
>I got all excitedall over again.
>NARRATOR:In November 1932, communiststook their public protests
>to the steps of the Capitol
>where they were routedby the police.
>But inside, their lawyers wereappealing the Scottsboro verdict
>before the Supreme Courtof the United States.
>The justices consideredwhether in the Scottsboro trials
>the boys' legal defensehad been so inadequate
>that it violated their rightsto legal due process.
>By a vote of seven to two,they concluded that it had.
>STEVENSON:The Supreme Court, ina precedent-setting decision
>for the first time held
>that poor people, likethe Scottsboro defendants
>get effective assistancefrom lawyers
>and where they were denied
>effective assistancefrom lawyers
>they would be affordednew trials.
>NARRATOR:Alabama authoritiesimmediately resolved
>to retry, reconvict and executethe nine defendants.
>GOODMAN:The communists realizeat this point
>that they've gotto show the world
>that these defendantsare actually innocent.
>What's the best way to do that?
>Get the bestcriminal lawyer around.
>NARRATOR:In the early 1930s
>the best-known criminal lawyerin America--
>after Clarence Darrow-- wasNew York's Samuel L. Leibowitz.
>Leibowitz had wonfame and fortune
>by defending gangsters...
>kidnappers...
>rapists...
>corrupt cops...
>and jealous lovers.
>In 15 years, he had won77 out of 78 murder cases;
>the 78th resultedin a hung jury.
>Leibowitz was, first of all, aremarkably thorough researcher.
>He studiedevery aspect of a case
>never left a stone unturned.
>Add to that, he was a showman.
>He literallycould have been an actor.
>He had a supple baritoneinstrument for a voice
>which he could uselike a Paderewski
>or a Jascha Heifetz,so to speak.
>And he had a sense of timing
>that Jack Bennywould have envied.
>NARRATOR:In January 1933,Joseph Brodsky--
>one of the leaders of theInternational Labor Defense--
>asked Leibowitz to take overas chief defense attorney.
>But Leibowitz was wary
>of entanglementwith the communists.
>BROWN:Ideologically, he would beabout the last man
>to representthe Scottsboro movement.
>He made it clear,"I don't agree with you guys.
>I don't like what you're doing."
>NARRATOR:But if one thing wasmore important to Leibowitz
>than political principle,it was his personal reputation
>and the Scottsboro affairwas fast becoming
>an international cause célèbre.
>GOODMAN:He wanted to makea name for himself
>that was larger thanthe criminals' lawyer
>and he wanted to widenthe circle of his renown.
>ROBERT LEIBOWITZ:After my father met withBrodsky and Patterson of the ILD
>and their agreement wasfinalized and he said to them
>"Look, if I don'tbring these nine boys back
>"and dump them in your lap
>"I'll buy both of you thefinest hats that Stetson makes.
>Take my word on it."
>BROWN:He was he was probablyas provincial
>as most New Yorkers were then,and I think still are
>thinking that things would bethe same down there.
>He had no idea that it was likegoing into a different country.
>Rules are different--everything is different.
>He had no idea.
>NARRATOR:The second trial ofthe Scottsboro defendants
>had been moved to Decatur,a town in northeast Alabama.
>As it opened in April 1933
>300 spectators crowdedthe hallways
>waiting to enter the courtroom.
>Hundreds more gathered outside.
>WOMAN:I went because of history.
>I had never seenanything like that before
>and I wanted to knowjust how it would be carried on.
>When we entered the courtroom,we were not told the way to go.
>We knew the way to go
>because it was black on one sideand white on the other.
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz had won a motion totry the defendants separately.
>To stand trial first, the statehad selected Haywood Patterson.
>KELLEY:If the prosecutors were goingto win and win big
>Haywood Patterson wasthe best person to put on trial
>because Haywood Patterson wasthe exemplar of the "bad Negro."
>He was someone who looked
>the closest you can imagineto a rapist
>as far as the whiteimagination's concerned.
>MAN:Patterson was mean.
>I looked him in the eyewhen we...
>first time we brought himout of jail.
>I saw that he'd killif he got a chance.
>NARRATOR:Alabama would entrustthe prosecution of the case
>to its highest-ranking lawyer,Attorney General Thomas Knight.
>The 34-year-old Knight hadthe demeanor, one reporter wrote
>"of a smalland enthusiastic child."
>Yet he was Leibowitz'sequal in the courtroom
>and like Leibowitz,he was highly ambitious.
>THORNTON:He said, "I'm goingto prosecute these boys
>and ride their black asses rightinto the governor's mansion."
>NARRATOR:Presiding over the case
>would be the chief judgeof the local circuit court
>55-year-old James E. Horton.
>ROBERT LEIBOWITZ:The trial judge in Decatur
>was a Lincolnesque-type,thorough Southern gentleman--
>very mannerly
>very sober
>very conscious of properprocedure in a courtroom.
>NARRATOR:Jury selection took placeunder heavy security.
>The 12 jurors ultimately chosento sit in judgment of Patterson
>included a shopkeeper, a barber,a clerk and several farmers.
>All of them were white.
>As the state prepared to presentits case, newspapers reported
>the mysterious disappearanceof Ruby Bates
>who was rumored to have beenkidnapped or even killed.
>Every effort by the prosecutionand defense to find her
>had come up empty.
>More than ever, the prosecutionwould rise or fall
>on the testimonyof Victoria Price alone.
>GOODMAN:Victoria Price gets on the standand in a matter of minutes says
>she was ridingon a freight train.
>Suddenly a large group of blacks
>comes hopping overonto the car that she is on
>quickly dispatches with herwhite companions, beats them up
>throws them off the train,and then en masse holds her up
>rips her clothes off,and rapes her.
>PRICE ( dramatized ):I hollered for help until they stopped me
>until some of themknocked me in the head
>with the butt end of a gun.
>They unfastened my overallswhile I was standing up
>and then they threw me downon the gravel
>and finished pulling themoff my feet.
>This Negro grabbed me bythe legs and pulled them open
>and then one of themput a knife on my throat
>and one got on top of me.
>GLASSCOCK:She just pointedat Patterson and said
>"He raped me,"right there in the courtroom.
>NARRATOR:Price's direct testimonylasted just 16 minutes
>but made a powerful impressionon the jury
>and the audiencein the courtroom.
>But Leibowitz was unconcerned.
>For months, he had waitedfor just this moment:
>the chance to confront VictoriaPrice in a court of law.
>He began his cross-examination
>by setting out an exact replicaof the freight train
>which he had procuredfrom the Lionel Toy Corporation.
>ROBERT LEIBOWITZ:My father had set upthis train set
>in order to demonstrate wherethe alleged rape took place
>because his own clientshad told him where they were
>and it did not coincidewith where she claimed she was.
tts:textAlign="right">SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ( dramatized ):Just look
>at thislittle replica
>and tell me if itfairly represents
>the general appearanceof the box caryou rode on.
tts:textAlign="left">PRICE ( dramatized ):It kinda represents one
tts:textAlign="left">but it ain't likethe one I was on.
>In what way isit different?
tts:textAlign="right">Can you say?
tts:textAlign="left">I won't say.
>If you can't say,why do you say it is different?
tts:textAlign="left">Because that is notthe train I was on.
tts:textAlign="left">It was bigger,lots bigger.
tts:textAlign="left">That is a toy.
>( audience murmuring, gavel banging )
>GOODMAN:She just refuses for questionafter question after question
>to admit the most basic point:that this in any way resembles
>the trainthat she was riding on.
>I think at that moment,Sam Leibowitz realized
>that she may have beenuneducated
>but she was going to be
>a hell of a witnessfor the prosecution.
>NARRATOR:Again and again, Leibowitzattacked Price's story
>in every possible detail:
>her location on the train,her physical condition
>her movements on the daybefore the alleged rape.
>But in each case, Price was ableto parry his attacks.
>He finds dozens,scores of inconsistencies.
>Yet she has a manner
>that makes it difficultfor him to make his points.
>It wasn't that he'd never hada difficult witness before.
>It was that he'd never had awitness that said over and over
>"I can't remember."
>Usually a witness isdefensive when they say
>She aggressively saidshe couldn't remember
>and used it to her advantage.
>I feel if you arereally telling the truth
>you can look anybodyin the eye.
>Victoria never looked directly.
>It was like...almost to the floor.
>Until she was made angry,and then she would shout
>"I don't know anything!
>I told you that before,and I'll tell it to you again!"
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz knewthat he had to overcome
>one crucial pieceof state's evidence:
>An examination of the girls
>just hours after they werebrought from the train
>had turned up traces of semenin their bodies.
>But Leibowitz believed
>he could explain the semenfound in Price and Bates
>not by rape onthe day of the train ride
>but by consensual sexthe night before.
>Price had claimedthat she and Bates
>had spent that night ina boardinghouse in Chattanooga
>owned by a Mrs. Callie Brochie.
>But Leibowitzhad scoured Chattanooga
>and found noCallie Brochie anywhere.
>GOODMAN:So he asked herdozens of questions
>about Miss Callie Brochieand where she lived
>and what she looked likeand had she ever met her before.
tts:textAlign="right">SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ:You went to bedin the lady's house?
tts:textAlign="left">PRICE:Yes, sir.
tts:textAlign="right">Was it one-flooror two-floor?
tts:textAlign="left">I don't remember,four- or a five-room house.
>What sortof food?
>What did you doin the evening?
tts:textAlign="right">What sort of bedor room?
tts:textAlign="left">I don't know.
>By the way, Mrs. Price,as a matter of fact
>the name of "Mrs.Callie" you apply
>to thisboardinghouse lady
tts:textAlign="right">is the same name ofa boardinghouse lady
>used in the Saturday Evening Post stories.
>Isn't that whereyou got the name?
tts:textAlign="left">I never heardof that Callie!
>ROBERT LEIBOWITZ:The truth aboutCallie Brochie was
>that she wasa fictional character
>in stories that appearedin the Saturday Evening Post.
>There was no Callie Brochie onSeventh Street in Chattanooga.
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz had found a witness,a drifter named Lester Carter
>who claimed that he knew wherePrice and Bates had really been
>the night before the train ride:
>with himself and a friend in ahobo camp near the train yards.
>Now Leibowitz confronted Pricewith this story.
>SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ:Did you tell a man
tts:textAlign="right">by the nameof Lester Carter
>that you wouldintroduce him to Ruby?
tts:textAlign="left">PRICE:I told you before
tts:textAlign="left">I never seenLester Carter before.
>Isn't it a factthat the night
tts:textAlign="right">before youleft Chattanooga
>you andyour boyfriend
>and Ruby andLester Carter
tts:textAlign="right">went walking alongthe railroad tracks?
tts:textAlign="left">No, sir, we neverhave been on therailroad together.
tts:textAlign="right">Isn't it a fact,Mrs. Price
tts:textAlign="right">that you hadintercourse
>with your boyfriendon the ground
tts:textAlign="right">while Ruby hadintercourse withLester Carter
>right beside you?
tts:textAlign="left">We absolutelydid not.
>( audience murmuring )
>NARRATOR:Frustrated,Leibowitz finally shouted
>"You're a pretty goodlittle actress, aren't you?"
>MAN:And she fired right backat him immediately;
>she said, "You area pretty good actor yourself."
>I remember that.
>NARRATOR:Unable to shake her story
>Leibowitz resorted to accusingPrice directly of lying.
>SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ:Isn't the reason
>why you're makingthese charges
>you were found hoboingon a freight train?
tts:textAlign="left">PRICE:I was seeking workfor my mother.
>And you sawthe Negroeshad been captured
>by the peopleat Paint Rock
>and you thought youwould be arrestedfor vagrancy
tts:textAlign="right">for being a hoboon a train
>in the companyof Negroes
>and at that timeyou determined tosay they raped you
>to save yourself!
tts:textAlign="left">No, sir, I didn't!
>NARRATOR:Northern reporterswho had been in the courtroom
>wired breathless accounts
>of Leibowitz's brilliantcross-examination.
>But to many Southerners,it had been a deep affront.
>READER:"One possessed of thatold Southern chivalry
>"cannot readthe transcript of the trial
>"and keep within the law.
>"The brutal manner
>"in which Leibowitzcross-examines Mrs. Price
>makes one feellike reaching for his gun."
>The Sylacauga News.
>DAN CARTER:He thought with each attackhe was strengthening his case.
>And what he didn't understand
>was that with each attackon Victoria Price
>he was weakening his case
>because the audience saw thisnot as an attack as he saw it
>upon this woman of ill repute,this prostitute.
>They saw it as an attackon Southern womanhood.
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz's cross-examination
>had stirred deep memoriesamong Southerners
>of humiliations sufferedat the hands of the North.
>GOODMAN:In the minds of many Alabamans
>by the middle of the trialin Judge Horton's court
>this case is not so muchabout what happened
>on that freight train.
>This trial is a replaying
>of abolitionism, civil warand Reconstruction.
>READER:"70 years ago, the scalawagsand carpetbaggers
>"marched into the South and said
>"'The Negro is your equal andyou will accept him as such.'
>"Today, the Reds of New York
>"march into the South witha law book and again say
>"'The Negro is your equal andyou will accept him as such.'
>We will not!"
>The Jackson County Sentinel.
>THORNTON:While blacks felt they wereoppressed by Southern whites
>Southern whites had a strongsense of their own oppression--
>that they were junior partnersin the American experiment;
>that they werenot fully accepted
>as citizensof the United States.
>And they resented that.
>NARRATOR:Much of that resentment wasdirected at Leibowitz himself.
>GRIGG:He didn't like the South
>and the South didn't like himin numbers.
>No get.
>( chuckles )
>We didn't ever care for him.
>ROYER:You heard the expressions
>from the outside ofthe courtroom, so to speak
>that... "that Jew lawyerought to go back to New York."
>( laughs )
>NARRATOR:Two retired New York Cityhomicide detectives
>began to accompany Leibowitzeverywhere he went.
>READER:Cable to the Brooklyn Eagle:
>"There's intense feeling here
>"because we have broughtthe question of Negro rights
>"into the open.
>"I have received numerouscrank letters
>"threatening deathif I don't stop.
>"We are sittingon a mountain of TNT.
>Samuel Leibowitz."
>WOMAN:I was walking alongon the sidewalk.
>A dirt farmer came along
>and shoved me off the sidewalkinto the road
>and spit his tobacco juice.
>And to this day, I can feelthat spit rolling down my cheek.
>NARRATOR:As the trial resumed, the tenseatmosphere in the courtroom
>was heightenedby a spring heat wave.
>The state called to the standDr. R.R. Bridges
>the Scottsboro physicianwho had examined Price and Bates
>hours after they'd been takenfrom the train.
>As expected, he confirmed
>that he had found semenin their bodies.
>Leibowitz now cross-examines him
>and essentially turns himinto a witness for the defense.
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz asked the doctor
>if the girls had shownany signs of a struggle--
>bruises or scratches.
>He answered, "No."
>Had the girls been hysterical,breathing heavily
>with elevated pulses?
>"No."
>Had the sperm he had seenin his microscope been moving?
>Again: "No."
>The spermatozoa were nonmotile;that means they were dead
>and they would nothave been nonmotile
>if six Negroes had ejaculatedthemselves into her
>an hour to an hour and a halfbefore she was examined
>by the doctor.
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz next calledhis star witness
>Lester Carter, to the stand.
>Carter testifiedthat he and a friend
>had been with the two girls
>the night beforethe fateful train ride.
tts:textAlign="left">LESTER CARTER ( dramatized ):Victoria Pricesaid she knew
tts:textAlign="left">where we could goand see fun.
tts:textAlign="left">Take a walk,for instance.
tts:textAlign="right">SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ( dramatized ):Go ahead--
>what happened?
tts:textAlign="left">We walked up the yardstill we come to the hobo jungles.
tts:textAlign="right">What occurred inthe hobo junglesthat night?
tts:textAlign="left">We all sat down neara bending lake of water
tts:textAlign="left">where there washoneysuckles anda little ditch.
tts:textAlign="left">I hung my haton a little limb
tts:textAlign="left">and went to havingintercourse with Ruby.
tts:textAlign="left">By firelight, I saw
tts:textAlign="left">Victoria's boyfriend hadintercourse with her.
>DAN CARTER:This is what happened.
>It wasn't that they were raped.
>Victoria Price, Ruby Bates andtheir two boyfriends had sex
>and that's all it amounts to.
>NARRATOR:Throughout Patterson's trial
>the other eight defendantshad been kept locked away
>in the Decatur jail,unaware of the proceedings.
>Now Leibowitz brought themto the courthouse
>under heavy guard.
>Inside, Leibowitz called eachto the stand in turn.
>Each denied having ever touchedVictoria Price or Ruby Bates.
>The last to take the standwas Haywood Patterson.
tts:textAlign="right">SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ( dramatized ):Did you have
>anything to dowith a white girl?
tts:textAlign="left">PATTERSON ( dramatized ):I didn't see any girlson the train.
>You area colored boy.
>Would you dare rapea white girl?
tts:textAlign="left">No, sir.
>Haywood Patterson,did you rape this girl?
tts:textAlign="left">No, sir!
>BANKS:Each time he would say,"I did not touch any of them.
>I had nothing to dowith any of them."
>NARRATOR:With Patterson's testimony over
>many thought Leibowitzwould rest his case.
>GOODMAN:What Leibowitz does
>is pretend that he'sabout to rest his case.
>And then he quietlygoes up to the judge
>and says, "I'm goingto have one more witness."
>The crowd is buzzing.
>Horton doesn't knowwhat's going on.
>The prosecution doesn't have
>the slightest ideaof what's going on.
>CARTER:The door opens in the backof the courtroom
>and in comes Ruby Bates, onlyshe's coming into the courtroom
>not as a witnessfor the prosecution
>but as a witnessfor the defense.
>SCHWARTZBART:When she made her appearance
>the tension in the courtwas palpable.
>Knight was jittery.
>He turned red.
>The crowd, they were aghast:
>"There's Ruby Batestestifying for the defense."
>NARRATOR:Ruby Bates had spent the monthsbefore the trial in hiding
>as far from the media glare
>and the clutchesof the prosecution and defense
>as she could get.
>She had made her wayto New York
>until, finally, representativesof the ILD tracked her down
>and convinced herto return to Alabama.
tts:textAlign="right">SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ( dramatized ):You testified
>at Scottsboro
tts:textAlign="right">that six Negroesraped you
>and six Negroesraped Victoria.
>Who coached youto say that?
tts:textAlign="left">BATES ( dramatized ):Victoria told it
tts:textAlign="left">and I told it justlike she told it.
tts:textAlign="right">Did Victoria tell youwhat would happen to you
>if you didn'tfollow her story?
tts:textAlign="left">She said we mighthave to lay out asentence in jail.
>GOODMAN:So Bates essentially saysthat she made the whole thing up
>because "Victoria told meto make it up."
>She said, "If I didn'tmake up the story
>then we would haveto go to jail."
>NARRATOR:But Ruby fell aparton cross-examination.
>Knight pointed out thateither she was lying now
>or had lied two years earlierin Scottsboro.
>Ruby became flustered.
>Knight hammered away at her.
>GOODMAN:He asks her whereshe got her pocketbook
>where she got her hat,where she got her coat.
>What was she doing in New York?
>How did she getfrom New York to Alabama?
>NARRATOR:To each question, she answered,"The communists."
>Aha!
>The only reason she's doing this
>is because she's been boughtand paid for.
>She told the truththe first time.
>Now she's lying for the moneyand for the clothing.
>NARRATOR:The jury, one reporter said,"smelled the North" on Ruby.
>CARTER:By the time she gets downoff the witness stand
>what should have been
>the most effective witnessfor the defense--
>as one of the jurors said later
>"We never even consideredher testimony."
>NARRATOR:Summations began the next day.
>Wade Wright,one of Knight's co-prosecutors
>opened with an emotional appeal.
>He ridiculed Bates's"fancy New York clothes"
>and called Lester Carter"Carterinsky."
>DAN CARTER:He turns to the jury, pointshis finger to the jury and says
>"Show them that Alabama justicecan't be bought and sold
>with Jew money from New York!"
>Of course, immediately,Leibowitz is on his feet.
>He objected.
>He wanted... calledfor a mistrial immediately.
>Of course, it was overruled.
>NARRATOR:In his closing argument
>Leibowitz called Wade Wright'ssummation for the prosecution
>a "hangman's speech."
>SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ:What is it but an appealto prejudice
>to sectionalism, to bigotry?
>He was simply saying,"Come on, boys!
>We can lick this Jewfrom New York."
>The question here is
>whether even this poor scrapof colored humanity
>will receive a square deal.
>NARRATOR:Finally, Leibowitz saidof Price's testimony
>"It is the foul,contemptible lie
>of an abandoned, brazen woman."
>At 1:00 on Saturday afternoon
>Judge Horton gave the caseto the jury.
>The 12 men filedout of the courthouse
>less than two weeks afterthey had been sworn in.
>Haywood Patterson
>nearly forgottenin the courtroom hubbub
>passed the time with his motheron a bench outside.
>At 10:00 the next morning
>word came that a verdicthad been reached:
>guilty.
>And the sentence:death by electrocution.
>Patterson conceded no emotionas he sat at the defense table
>but Leibowitz could not hidehis disappointment.
>CARTER:When that jury brought inthat verdict of guilty
>everyone said he looked likesomeone had struck him.
>He just sank back in his seat
>with a look of disbeliefon his face.
>NARRATOR:The verdict had finally madeplain to Leibowitz himself
>how naive he had been.
>He had carefully considered
>how the jury would see everyaspect of the trial but one--
>himself.
>FLYNT:They saw the ultimate outsider--
>someone who was Jewish, totallyforeign to their religion.
>They saw someone who wasallegedly a communist
>totally foreignto their political values.
>They saw someone who wasdefending accused black rapists;
>someone totally contraryto their racial values.
>The minute a Jewish lawyer fromNew York City came to Alabama
>that case was lost.
>NARRATOR:Upon his return to New York
>Leibowitz was swampedby more than 3,000 admirers.
>Carried away, he ventedhis anger at the verdict.
>SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ:If you ever sawthose creatures--
>those bigots whose mouthsare slits in their faces;
>whose eyes popped outat you like frogs;
>whose chins dripped tobaccojuice, bewhiskered and filthy--
>you would not askhow they could do it.
>CARTER:And of course, there arethe reporters writing it down.
>And the next morning there
>it's in the newspapersall over Alabama.
>In this case,I think Leibowitz's ego
>his anger got the best of him.
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz's outburst elicitedhowls of protest
>throughout the South.
>Grover Hall, influential editorof the Montgomery Advertiser
>immediately lashed back.
>READER:"He left little,if anything, undone
>"to arouse the resentment,if not the bitterness
>"of everyone in the courtroom,including members of the jury.
>"Mr. Leibowitz came into Alabama
>"as the voice of bigotryand arrogance.
>What a stupid lawyerpoor Patterson had!"
>Grover Hall,The Montgomery Advertiser.
>NARRATOR:Whatever Leibowitz had beenwhen he entered the case
>he was now a different man.
>CARTER:I don't thinkthere's any question
>that Leibowitz feltmuch more keenly
>having gone through this trial--
>seeing what had happenedto these defendants
>seeing the attacks on him--
>that there was a kind of bondin which he saw
>this is not simplythese defendants
>but also, in a sense,his own Jewishness was on trial.
>NARRATOR:In the months followingthe verdict
>he began to appearat Scottsboro rallies in Harlem
>where he promised to carry onthe struggle in the South.
>SAMUEL LEIBOWITZ:I will fight to my last breath
>to send these boys back to theirparents and to their loved ones.
>NARRATOR:From his home in Brooklyn, Leibowitz prepared a motion
>asking Judge Hortonto overturn the verdict
>and order a new trial.
>Judge Horton had retreatedto his farm in Limestone County
>after the verdict.
>But Leibowitz's motionnow forced him to confront
>his own doubts about the case.
>FLYNT:When that trial began
>he thoughtthe nine boys were guilty.
>And Lord knowsthere was plenty of evidence:
>their owncontradictory testimony;
>the allegationsof the two women.
>Then all of a sudden, there'sthis cascading kind of evidence
>that indicates somethinghas gone terribly wrong.
>HORTON:At one point, I remember,he arose from his chair
>and watched the manner in whichVictoria Price testified.
>And, you know, they sayyou can tell a lot
>by the way a person speaks.
>I think he thought, probablyfrom early on in the trial
>that this woman was lying.
>NARRATOR:But Horton wasa man of the South
>and the South was speakingin a single voice.
>Hundreds of letters arrivedat the Horton home
>nearly all praising the verdict.
>MAN:He had all kinds of pressurefrom friends--
>both personaland political friends--
>saying, "Don't dowhat we think you may do.
>If you do, it will destroy youpolitically."
>NARRATOR:In his colonnaded home
>Horton took up Leibowitz'smotion for a new trial.
>Working deep into the night
>he pored over every wordof the trial transcript.
>Why, he wondered, in therich cloud of possible witnesses
>had none stepped forwardto corroborate Price's story?
>After being brutally raped
>why would Price show onlyminor scrapes and bruises
>to an examining doctor,and only traces of dead semen?
>Was it likely
>that nine black teenagerscould have raped two white women
>in full viewon a slowly moving train
>and then made no move to escape?
>READER:"Her testimony wascontradictory, often evasive.
>"The proof tendsstrongly to show
>"that she knowinglytestified falsely
>"in many material aspectsof the case.
>"Deliberate injustice is morefatal to the one who imposes it
>than to the oneon whom it is imposed."
>Judge James Horton.
>DOSS:Here is a man that sees himself
>as having to go against muchof what has been his life
>much of a systemthat he's been a part of
>that he's benefited from,that's been good to him
>and now he's going to haveto stand up and say, "Uh-uh."
>NARRATOR:On June 22, 1933,in a crowded courtroom
>Horton set asidethe guilty verdict.
>He ordered the Scottsborodefendants to stand trial
>for the third time.
>While the trials had beengoing on in the South
>outrage over the Scottsboroaffair had migrated
>from radical circlesto ordinary people.
>In Harlem, thousands had closelyfollowed the events in Alabama.
>The verdict shockedand radicalized many.
>Scottsboro helped forgea new kind of movement.
>Whites and blacks marchedside by side
>for the first timesince the days of abolition.
>GOODMAN:The Scottsboro case wasone of the sparks
>that rekindledthe movement for equality.
>Between the end ofReconstruction and the 1930s
>there was a strugglefor equality
>but it was essentiallya black struggle for equality.
>Scottsboro is the rekindling
>of an interracial movementof equality.
>BROWN:"Black and white uniteand fight."
>That was a standard inall of the demonstrations--
>this conceptof interracial unity.
>NARRATOR:The communists seizedon Scottsboro's notoriety
>to reach a wider audience.
>They sponsored the mothersof the defendants
>on a national speaking tour.
>Janie Patterson
>who had never traveled morethan 100 miles from her home
>led a protest marchon the White House.
>Ada Wright, motherof Roy and Andy Wright
>embarked on a six-month tourof Europe ending in Moscow
>where she spokebefore crowds of thousands.
>On many stages, the motherswere joined by Ruby Bates.
>Cast out of the Southfor her testimony in Decatur
>Ruby now apologized for her lie
>and proudly proclaimed herselfa communist.
>BROWN:She spoke many times
>and told of the great wrongthat she had done
>and that she was concerned
>that these boys' lives shouldnot be lost on account of her.
>NARRATOR:But all the speeches and ralliesin the North
>did nothing to deter Alabama.
>Almost immediatelyafter Judge Horton's decision
>the state announced
>that it would retrythe Scottsboro prisoners.
>FLYNT:Alabamians have neverbacked away from a fight.
>There's no state in this union
>that has a bigger chipon its shoulder than Alabama.
>And so, in a sense
>this national reaction worksagainst the Scottsboro boys--
>not to back Alabamians off,but to harden and toughen
>the resistanceto any kind of fair trial.
>NARRATOR:Once again, Patterson would gofirst, but this time
>Alabama authoritieswere taking no chances.
>Attorney General Thomas Knight--also the state's prosecutor--
>engineered the removalof Judge Horton from the case
>and named in his place 70-year-old Judge William Callahan.
>CARTER:Judge Callahan was fromthe old school in many ways:
>I think much less widely readthan Judge Horton
>much less sensitiveto these issues
>and, in fact,to an extraordinary degree
>a creatureof his own prejudices
>so that from day onein the trial
>he becomes, in effect,another prosecutor.
>NARRATOR:Repeatedly, throughout the trialin Callahan's courtroom
>the judge frustratedLeibowitz's defense
>overruling his objections
>and excluding crucial evidenceto his case.
>ROBERT LEIBOWITZ:At one point
>Attorney General Knight wantedto voice an objection
>and Callahan said, "Sit down.
>I'll take care of him."
>And he looked at my fatherand he pointed his finger.
>So after that,Attorney General Knight knew
>that it wasn't necessaryto form any objections;
>Callahan would take care of it.
>NARRATOR:The jury deliberated a daybefore reconvicting Patterson
>and sentencing him to deathfor the third time.
>Norris's trial followed quicklywith the same result.
>Leibowitz managed to postponethe trials of the other seven
>but with little hopeof a different outcome.
>All nine boys were sent backto Kilby's death house.
>By this time,their hope was fading.
>Kilby Prison was closing inaround them like a shroud.
>Despite contributionsfrom around the world
>to purchase new clothes, food,even musical instruments
>the boys' internationalnotoriety singled them out
>for continual torment.
>STEVENSON:The guards who ranKilby Prison--
>certainly the death-row unit--saw it as their role
>to punish you, to torture you,to beat you
>to brutalize you, to break you.
>And that's what happened.
>NARRATOR:When Charlie Weemswas discovered
>reading communist literature,guards dragged him from his cell
>and beat himuntil he begged for mercy.
>At one point
>Ozie Powell slashed the throatof a sheriff's deputy
>with a homemade knife.
>A second officer then shot himin the head.
>Though he survived,Powell was never the same.
>Patterson and Norris feudedconstantly over gambling debts
>Norris once stabbing Pattersonwith a prison shank.
>They started to turnon one another.
>They started to fightwith one another.
>They grew more hopelessabout their situation.
>They were literally livinglike dying men might live.
>NARRATOR:The boys' cells were separatedby a thin door
>from Kilby's electric chair.
>Norris would lay awake listeningto the midnight executions.
>KINSHASA:Norris can hear the last words.
>Every single individualwho was going to be executed
>Norris hears the last words.
>The switch is thrown.
>The lights actually dimin the death house itself.
>Every time it was himgoing in there.
>It was him dying, over and overand over and over again.
>ANNOUNCER:Back in New York, Mr. Leibowitztells of the appeals.
>The appeals are now being rushedto the Alabama Supreme Court.
>I have every confidence in theworld that we shall win there.
>In the event that we do not,we are going right on up
>to the United StatesSupreme Court in Washington
>NARRATOR:Leibowitz soldiered onwith one last appeal
>to stop the scheduled executionof his clients.
>In each of the Scottsboro trials
>the boys had facedan all-white jury--
>a clear violation, he believed
>of their right to equalprotection under the law.
>White Alabamians did not believe
>that blacks ought to serveon juries.
>And black Alabamians assumed
>that they would not serveon juries.
>They never had.
>NARRATOR:In February 1935
>the Supreme Court of the UnitedStates heard Norris v. Alabama
>which would determine
>whether Alabama had purposelyexcluded blacks
>from their juries.
>To prove that they had
>Leibowitz brought with him thehuge jury rolls from Decatur.
>In them, he had madea startling discovery.
>Of the prospective jurorslisted, all were white
>except for a handful of blacks
>whose names appearedto have been hastily scrawled
>at the bottoms of several pages.
>BROWN:They just tooka whole group of blacks
>and added them to the list
>as if they had been thereall the time.
>And when the judges of theSupreme Court looked at that
>they had no comment.
>They just looked, said...in effect, said, "Oh, my God!"
>It was crude.
>NARRATOR:In a landmark decision,the Supreme Court ruled
>that Alabama had deliberatelyexcluded blacks
>from their juries
>and yet again overturnedthe guilty verdicts.
>Exhausted, embarrassed and nearbroke from trial after trial
>Alabama's once united frontregarding Scottsboro
>finally began to crumble.
>CARTER:A lot of Southernersbegan to say
>"Look, this thing is moretrouble than it's worth.
>"And there really areserious questions here
>and maybe the best thing to dois to settle this case."
>NARRATOR:Grover Hall, editorof the Montgomery Advertiser
>once one of themost ardent defenders
>of the Scottsboro verdicts
>began to wonder if somethinghad not gone terribly wrong.
>READER:"The Advertiser knows,all of its readers know
>"the whole of this sordid,sickening story.
>"Scottsboro has stigmatizedAlabama
>"throughout the civilized world.
>"We herewith suggest and urge
>"that the state now move fora decent, dignified compromise.
>"Nothing can be gained
>"by demandingthe final pound of flesh.
>Throw this body of death awayfrom Alabama."
>Grover Hall.
>NARRATOR:Hall quietly began to lobby
>for an endto the Scottsboro prosecutions
>and the paroleof its defendants.
>State officials listened
>but made clear that onecondition would have to be met:
>Samuel Leibowitzwould have to go.
>For Leibowitz, the notionthat he shared blame
>for the convictionsof his own clients
>was almost too bitterto swallow.
>ROBERT LEIBOWITZ:He never believed thatfor a moment.
>Their blackness convicted them--not him, not the ILD
>not all the other extraneousinfluences in the case.
>The fact is they're black,and that's what convicted them.
>NARRATOR:But Leibowitz had no choicebut to give in.
>As Alabama beganthe fourth trial
>of the Scottsboro defendants
>he stepped aside in favorof a Southern attorney.
>CARTER:I can't imagine many thingsmore difficult for Sam Leibowitz
>than to sit in a courtroom andbe the second-ranked attorney--
>to sit there while anotherattorney takes on the case.
>But everyone convinced himthat that's what he had to do.
>NARRATOR:With Leibowitz gone
>Alabama quickly convictedfive of the defendants.
>But it abruptly dropped thecharges against the other four:
>Olin Montgomery,Willie Roberson, Roy Wright
>and Eugene Williams.
>CARTER:Two of them are 13 years old
>at the timethe incident took place.
>One of them was blind,one of them had syphilis
>and simply couldn't havehad sexual intercourse.
>And basicallythe state said, "All right
>we'll give you those."
>( record playing )
>MAN:♪ We're Alabamaand you better watch out ♪
>♪ The landlord get you,gonna jump and shout ♪
>♪ Scottsboro boys,Scottsboro boys ♪
>♪ They can tell youwhat it's all about... ♪
>NARRATOR:The four were spirited outof Alabama in July 1937
>after six years in jail.
>MAN:♪ Scottsboro boys,Scottsboro boys ♪
>♪ They can tell youwhat it's all about... ♪
>NARRATOR:They arrived in New Yorkthe next day.
>Leibowitz was so overcomethat he took off his straw hat
>and punched a hole through it.
>For a moment
>the freed defendantswere celebrated as heroes.
>They were takenon a speaking tour
>and booked into the ApolloTheater, where they sang, danced
>and took part in a reenactmentof their trial.
>MAN:♪ Scottsboro boys,Scottsboro boys ♪
>♪ they can tell youwhat it's all about. ♪
>( song ends )
>NARRATOR:But just as suddenly,the fanfare died down.
>The boys drifted backinto obscurity.
>Their pleas for helpto their former sponsors
>frequently went unanswered.
>For the five defendantsremaining in Kilby
>the release of the four othersonly heightened their despair.
>Their supporters continuedto push for their release.
>"How," asked Grover Hall, "couldthe Scottsboro defendants
>be half guiltyand half innocent?"
>By 1941, the Alabama ParoleBoard had met three times
>each time refusingto free the prisoners.
>The boys,now grown to men in prison
>received fewerand fewer visitors
>and watched as the Scottsborocase began to disappear
>from the nation's consciousness.
>( train chugging )
>( train whistle blows )
>But world's forgetfulnessproved to be
>the Scottsboro prisoners'greatest ally.
>As the rancorous attackson Alabama ended
>the state at last bowedto reason and exhaustion.
>In the end, it was not letters,marches or editorials
>but time alone that broughtthe Scottsboro affair to an end.
>In November 1943
>the Alabama Parole Board metfor a fourth time.
>This time it voted to parole31-year-old Charlie Weems
>after 12 years in Kilby.
>Two months later,Andy Wright was released.
>Then Clarence Norris.
>In 1946, Ozie Powell, 33,was let go.
>Only Patterson, the man whosedefiant pride had marked him
>from the beginning as themost visible, the most hated
>of the Scottsboro defendants,remained in prison--
>"sullen, viciousand incorrigible"
>according to theAlabama Parole Board.
>Patterson had become a creatureof Alabama's prisons.
>He was sentto Atmore Prison Farm
>where he worked in the hot sunfor 12 hours a day
>chained to other prisoners.
>Throughout everything,he would later write
>Scottsboro haunted his dreams.
>READER:"I laid on the top bunk
>"in a way still feelingI was on a moving freight.
>"Nothing was standing still.
>"I was busy livingfrom minute to minute
>"and everything was rumbling.
>"I dreamed bad dreams withfreight trains, guards' faces
>and courtrooms mixed up withthe look of the sky at night."
>Haywood Patterson.
>NARRATOR:On a hot afternoon in July 1948
>Patterson slipped awayfrom Atmore
>with eight other prisoners.
>With dogs in pursuit, he wadedthrough streams for days
>and was harbored at nightby sympathetic black families.
>Finally, he hopped a freightnorth to Detroit
>where his sister and her familywere waiting.
>The last of the Scottsboro boyswas free.
>The town of Scottsborohas never lived down
>the accident of geography
>that forged its namewith those of the defendants.
>If the train had gone300 more yards,I believe it was
>it would have beenin Madison County
>and we certainlywouldn't have objected.
>That's very true, it wouldhave been the Huntsville boys
>instead of the Scottsboro boys
>and we would have beenvery glad of that.
>NARRATOR:The year after Judge JamesHorton overturned the verdict
>in the Decatur trial,he was defeated for reelection
>and would never again serveon the bench.
>On the top of a campaign speech
>he had scrawleda note to himself:
>"Ye shall know the truth, andthe truth shall make you free."
>Samuel Leibowitz never wona victory in an Alabama court
>for the Scottsboro defendants,but he did save their lives.
>With the Supreme Court decisionin Norris v. Alabama
>he also set in motion theintegration of Southern juries
>which would make possible manyof the civil rights victories
>in later decades.
>In 1941, Leibowitz was appointedto the bench in New York
>where, with a new vantage point
>he became a passionate advocate for capital punishment.
>Victoria Price disappearedafter the last Scottsboro trial
>and was presumed to have diedsometime in the mid-1950s.
>Then in 1976,she surfaced to sue NBC
>for broadcastinga television movie
>that portrayed heras a prostitute and a liar.
>The suit was settled quietlyfor what for NBC was a pittance
>but for Victoria Price was moremoney than she'd ever known.
>She died, for real, a fewyears later, still insisting
>that she had told the truth.
>After their release from prison
>most of the Scottsborodefendants led troubled lives
>in the North.
>Haywood Patterson killed a manin self-defense in a bar fight
>and died in a Michiganpenitentiary at the age of 39.
>Andy Wright wound upin Albany, New York
>where he was again falselyaccused of raping a white girl;
>this time he was acquitted.
>His brother Roy,youngest of the defendants
>served in the army and married.
>In 1959, convinced thathis wife was cheating on him
>Roy shot and killed her
>and then, with his Bible by hisside, shot and killed himself.
>He is buried in a neglectedcemetery in Chattanooga.
>Beside him, in an unmarkedgrave, lies his brother Andy.
>FLYNT:I think that's perhapsan ultimate tragedy--
>people pulled into history
>who never wantedto be pulled into history
>suddenly puton a national platform
>and tragically paraded outfor everybody's benefit
>but their own.
>And the question of whoreally cared about them
>who really defended them--almost everyone had an agenda
>that involvedthe Scottsboro boys.
>And I think the courageof the Scottsboro boys
>is just surviving...just enduring.
>NARRATOR:Of all the Scottsborodefendants, only Clarence Norris
>made a life for himselfin the North.
>He broke parole in 1946and fled Alabama
>making his way to New York.
>Assuming his brother's name, hegot a job as a sanitation worker
>married twice, raised a family,and began a fight
>to get a full pardonfrom the state of Alabama.
>KINSHASA:He wanted the world to know
>that he was an innocent man.
>He had a responsibility now
>to make surethat the world understood
>that those nine defendantsin 1931 were innocent
>and that it was racism,only racism
>that, in fact, forced them tospend all those years in prison.
>NARRATOR:On an October day in 1976,Norris received word
>that Governor George Wallacehad pardoned him.
>CARTER:Clarence Norrisflies to Alabama
>goes and meets the membersof the Pardon and Parole Board
>and there goes intoGeorge Wallace's office
>and George Wallace
>the great defender of theracial status quo in the South
>signs a pardon saying,"We were wrong"
>that Alabama made a mistakein the 1930s
>and Clarence Norrisnever raped anybody.
>The Scottsboro defendantsnever raped anybody.
>Mr. Norris, this isyour pardon, full pardon.
>WASHINGTON:He was very emotionalwhen he received the pardon
>at the press conference
>because he rememberedgetting off that train
>with those other eight guys
>and here he was, gettinghis pardon-- he was alone.
>And I'm surehe could feel them around him.
>I'm sure he couldfeel their presence
>and he thought about them,"Why me?"
>NORRIS:I have no hate or prejudiceagainst any creed or color.
>I like all people, and I think
>all people accused of thingswhich they didn't commit
>should be free.
>I wish these other eight boyswas around.
>There's more about Scottsboro at American Experience Online.